docs: Describe landscape-by-landscape migration (#2523)
kyma-project/lifecycle-manager: docs/contributor/07-module-migration-guide.md

# New Module Submission and Promotion Process: Migration Guide

> To ensure a smooth transition, the submission pipeline, Lifecycle Manager (KLM), and Busola support **both** the old and new metadata formats. If both are present, KLM and Busola use the new format. If no new metadata format is provided, it falls back to the old channel-based metadata.

Reviewer: In case it's not 3 elements but 2, consider this:

```suggestion
To ensure a smooth transition, the submission pipeline - Lifecycle Manager (KLM), and Busola - support **both** the old and new metadata formats. If both are present, KLM and Busola use the new format. If no new metadata format is provided, it falls back to the old channel-based metadata.
```

         - ModuleTemplate `../../telemetry/moduletemplate-telemetry-1.34.0-experimental.yaml`
         - ModuleTemplate `../../telemetry/moduletemplate-telemetry-1.35.0-rc1.yaml`
         - ... (resources from other modules)

3. Verify in `dev` KCP.

   ArgoCD picks up and deploys the changes from step 2. The `dev` landscape has the same channel-version mapping of the module described in OLD and NEW metadata.

   Following the Telemetry module example, the following resources exist in KCP:

   **Old ModuleTemplates**
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-regular` pointing to `1.32.0`
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-fast` pointing to `1.34.0`
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-experimental` pointing to `1.34.0-experimental`
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-dev` pointing to `1.35.0-rc1`

   **New ModuleTemplates**
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-1.32.0`
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-1.34.0`
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-1.34.0-experimental`
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-1.35.0-rc1`
   - ModuleReleaseMeta `kyma-system/telemetry`

>    As the new module metadata takes precedence, the reconciliation of the module already happens based on the new metadata. Since all versions and channel mappings are the same, no update is performed and all modules stay in the same state as before.

Author: clarified: `no update is performed and all existing installations of the module stay in the same state as before.`

9. Verify in `prod` KCP.

   ArgoCD picks up and deploys the changes from step 8. The `prod` landscape has the same channel-version mapping of the module described in OLD and NEW metadata.

   Following the Telemetry module example, the following resources exist in KCP:

   **Old ModuleTemplates**
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-regular` pointing to `1.32.0`
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-fast` pointing to `1.34.0`

   **New ModuleTemplates**
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-1.32.0`
   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-1.34.0`
   - ModuleReleaseMeta `kyma-system/telemetry`

   As the new module metadata takes precedence, the reconciliation of the module already happens based on the new metadata. Since all versions and channel mappings are the same, no update is performed and all modules stay in the same state as before.

   The functionality can further be verified by enabling the module in a test SKR which will install it from scratch using the new metadata.

10. [OPTIONAL] Roll back the new module metadata.

   In case of failure, the setup can be reverted to the old approach.

>    To do so, a PR can be opened to `/kyma/kyma-modules` reverting the submission from 8. ArgoCD then undeploys the new module metadata and KLM falls back to the old module metadata.

Author: I think we can first target the individual landscapes. then have a case by case decision if we need to go further. Adapted slightly.

   - ModuleTemplate `kyma-system/telemetry-1.34.0`
   - ModuleReleaseMeta `kyma-system/telemetry`

   As the new module metadata takes precedence, the reconciliation of the module already happens based on the new metadata. Because all versions and channel mappings are the same, no update is performed and all installations of the module stay in the same state as before.

   The functionality can further be verified by enabling the module in a test SKR which will install it from scratch using the new metadata.

10. In case of failure, roll back the new module metadata.

    If the migration failed, you can revert the setup to the old approach.

    To roll back, open a PR to `/kyma/kyma-modules` reverting the submission to the prod landscape. ArgoCD then undeploys the new module metadata, and KLM falls back to the old module metadata.

> [!Note]
> After rollback, you can still use the old submission pipeline to submit new versions of the module while you're working on a fix.

### Performing a Version Upgrade

Also for version upgrades, first target the `dev` landscape. When the upgrade is performed and verified for `dev`, you can perform it for `stage` and eventually `prod`.

> 1. Submit a version upgrade using the old format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Submit a version update using the old format.
```

       version: 1.35.0-rc1
   ```

   Once you submit the mapping, the resources in `/kyma/kyma-modules` are the same as the resources from step 2. above, except the `regular` channel pointing to version `1.34.0` in the `dev` ModuleReleaseMeta CR. The ModuleReleaseMeta CRs for the other landscapes should remain untouched.

3. Verify if the module is updated in KCP.

   ArgoCD picks up this change and deploys the new ModuleReleaseMeta to the `dev` landscape. KLM is now picking up the version change and updating all modules using the `regular` channel to version `1.34.0`.

4. [OPTIONAL] Roll back the new metadata.

>    In case of failure, you can revert the setup to the old approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If the version upgrade failed, you can revert the setup to the old approach.
```

>    To do so, a PR can be opened to `/kyma/kyma-modules` reverting the submissions from steps 2. of Replicating the current state and 2. of Performing a version upgrade. It is important to revert completely removing the entire new metadata from KCP so that KLM falls back to the old module metadata.

Author: 👍🏻 Rephrased a bit

> [!Note]
> After rollback, you can still use the old submission pipeline to submit new versions of the module while you're working on a fix.

5. Promote to `stage` landscape

   Once verified on `dev`, promote the new metadata to `stage`.

   To do so, create a PR to `/kyma/kyma-modules` adding the `stage` landscape to the `targetLandscapes` in `/module-manifests/modules/<module-name>/module-releases.yaml`. For example:

   ```yaml
   targetLandscapes:
     - dev
     - stage # <= stage landscape added
   channels:
     - channel: regular
       version: 1.34.0
     - channel: fast
       version: 1.34.0
     - channel: experimental
       version: 1.34.0-experimental
     - channel: dev

>        version: 1.35.0-rc1

Author: Just in case there are failures. Before running a version upgrade, we still have "old" manifests that were generated using the "old" ModuleTemplates. Only once the version is bumped, we will update the manifests with the new data coming from the new ModuleTemplates. That's why we may still face errors when the version upgrade is performed and we should be prepared to roll back if so.

   ```

6. Verify if the module is updated in KCP.

   ArgoCD picks up this change and deploys the new ModuleReleaseMeta to the `stage` landscape. KLM is now picking up the version change and updating all modules using the `regular` channel to version `1.34.0`.

7. [OPTIONAL] Roll back the new metadata.

>    In case of failure, you can revert the setup to the old approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If the version upgrade failed, you can revert the setup to the old approach.
```

> [!Note]
> After rollback, you can still use the old submission pipeline to submit new versions of the module while you're working on a fix.

8. Promote to `prod` landscape

   Once verified on `stage`, promote the new metadata to `prod`.

   To do so, create a PR to `/kyma/kyma-modules` adding the `prod` landscape to the `targetLandscapes` in `/module-manifests/modules/<module-name>/module-releases.yaml`. For example:

   ```yaml
   targetLandscapes:
     - dev
     - stage
     - prod # <= prod landscape added
   channels:
     - channel: regular
       version: 1.34.0
     - channel: fast
       version: 1.34.0
     - channel: experimental
       version: 1.34.0-experimental
     - channel: dev
       version: 1.35.0-rc1
   ```

9. Verify if the module is updated in KCP.

   ArgoCD picks up this change and deploys the new ModuleReleaseMeta to the `prod` landscape. KLM is now picking up the version change and updating all modules using the `regular` channel to version `1.34.0`.

10. [OPTIONAL] Roll back the new metadata.

>    In case of failure, you can revert the setup to the old approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If the version upgrade failed, you can revert the setup to the old approach.
```

>    To do so, a PR can be opened to `/kyma/kyma-modules` reverting the submissions from steps 8. of Replicating the current state and 8. of Performing a version upgrade. It is important to revert completely removing the entire new metadata from KCP so that KLM falls back to the old module metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To roll back, open a PR to `/kyma/kyma-modules` reverting the submissions to stage from **both** [Replicating the Current State](#replicating-the-current-state) and [Performing a Version Upgrade]. It is important to revert completely removing the entire new metadata from KCP so that KLM falls back to the old module metadata.
```
As in line 317, consider using a warning if this could lead to bad trouble.

> [!Note]
> After rollback, you can still use the old submission pipeline to submit new versions of the module while you're working on a fix.

> ### Cleaning up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Cleaning Up
```

1. Delete all old metadata files related to the module.

   To do so, submit a PR deleting the old channel-based ModuleTemplates of the module.

2. Verify on KCP

>    ArgoCD picks up this change and removed the ModuleTemplates from all KCP landscapes. Verify that those are gone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ArgoCD picks up this change and removes the ModuleTemplates from all KCP landscapes. Verify that those are gone.
```

### Continuing

> 1. Continue to use the NEW approach to provide new module versions and update the mapping of channels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Continue using the **new** approach to provide new module versions and update the mapping of channels.
```
